=pod

=head1 NAME

B<sally> -- a tool for embedding strings in vector spaces

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<sally> [B<-hvV>] I<config> I<input> I<output>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<sally> is a small tool for mapping a set of strings to a set of vectors. This
mapping is referred to as embedding and allows for applying techniques of
machine learning and data mining for analysis of string data. B<sally> can
applied to several types of string data, such as text documents, DNA
sequences or log files, where it can handle common formats such as
directories, archives and text files of string data.

The embedding is carried out incrementally, where B<sally> first loads
a chunk of strings from I<input>, computes the mapping to vectors and
then writes the chunk of vectors to I<output>. The configuration of
this process, such as the input format, the embedding type and the
output format, are specified in the file I<config>.

    .---------.                        .----------.
    |   dir   |                        |   text   |
    |   arc   |   \   .---------.   /  |  libsvm  |
    |  lines  |   --  |  Sally  |  --  |  matlab  |
    |   ...   |   /   '---------'   \  |   ...    |
    '---------'                        '----------'
       Input           Embedding          Output 


=head2 Embedding strings

B<sally> implements a standard technique for mapping strings to a vector space
that is often referred to as vector space model or bag-of-words model.  The
strings are characterized by a set of features, where each feature is
associated with one dimension of the vector space.  The following types of
features are supported by B<sally>: bytes, words, n-grams of bytes and n-grams
of words.

B<sally> proceeds by counting the occurrences of the specified features in each
string and generating a sparse vector of count values.  Alternatively,
binary or TF-IDF values can be computed and stored in the vectors.  B<sally>
then normalizes the vector, for example using the L1 or L2 norm, and outputs
it in a specified format, such as plain text or in LibSVM or Matlab format.

=head2 Input formats

Following is a list of input formats supported by B<sally>. See the
configuration section for more details.

=over 14

=item B<dir> 

The input strings are available as binary files in a directory and the name
of the directory is given as I<input> to B<sally>. The suffixes of the
files are used as labels for the extracted vectors.

=item B<arc> 

The input strings are available as binary files in a compressed archive,
such as a zip or tgz archive.  The name of the archive is given as I<input>
to B<sally>.  The suffixes of the files are used as labels for the extracted
vectors.

=item B<lines> 

The input strings are available as lines in a text file. The name of the
file is given as I<input> to B<sally>.  No label information is supported by
this input format.  The lines need to be seperated by newline and may not
contain the NUL character.

=item B<fasta>

The input strings are available in FASTA format. The name of the file is
given as I<input> to B<sally>. Labels are extracted from the description
of each sequence using a regular expression. Comments are allowed if they
are preceeded by either ';' or '>'.

=back 

=head2 Feature Sets

Following is a list of features supported by B<sally>. See the
configuration section for more details.

=over 14

=item B<words>

The strings are partitioned into substrings (words) using a set of delimiter
characters.  Such partitioning is typical for natural language processing,
where the delimiters are usually defined as whitespace and punctation
symbols.  An embedding using words is selected by defining a set of
delimiter characters and setting the n-gram length to 1.  See the
configuration section.

=item B<byte n-grams>

The strings are characterized by all possible byte sequences of a fixed
length n (byte n-grams).  These features are frequently used if no
information about the structure of strings is available, such as in
bioinformatics or computer security.  An embedding using byte n-grams is
selected by defining the n-gram length and setting the delimiters to an
empty string.  See the configuration section.

=item B<word n-grams>

The strings are characterized by all possible word sequences of a fixed
length n (word n-grams).  These features require the definition of a set of
delimiters and a length n.  They are often used in natural language
processing as a coarse way for capturing structure of text.  An embedding
using word n-grams is selected by defining a set of delimiter characters and
choosing an n-gram length.  See the configuration section.

=back

=head2 Output formats

Following is a list of output formats supported by B<sally>. See the
configuration section for more details.

=over 14

=item B<libsvm> 

The feature vectors of the embedded strings are stored in libsvm format. 
The name of the output file is given as I<output> to B<sally>.

=item B<text> 

The feature vectors of the embedded strings are stored as a plain text using
a list of dimensions, features and respective values.  The name of the
output file is given as I<output> to B<sally>.

=item B<matlab>

The feature vectors of the embedded strings are stored in matlab format
(v5).  The vectors are stored as a cell array with 2 x n dimensions, where
the first row holds the source of each vector and the second the vector
itself as a sparse array.  The name of the output file is given as I<output>
to B<sally>.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

*TODO*

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2010 Konrad Rieck (konrad@mlsec.org)

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version.  This program is distributed without
any warranty. See the GNU General Public License for more details.
      
=cut
